Minutes of OGF20 Remote Instrumentation Services in Grid Environment BoF session.

Session place: OGF20, Manchester, UK, May 9th, 2007, 4 pm-5.30pm

Session name: Remote Instrumentation Services in Grid Environment (RISGE)

Session leader: Marcin Plociennik <marcinp@man.poznan.pl>, PSNC, Poland

Attendance: 46 participants


Projects involved in the preparation of the application form and BOF:
RINGrid, int.eu.grid, GRIDCC, g-Eclipse, DEGREE, Edutrain@Grid, BalticGrid, VLab

Session leader, Marcin Plociennik introduced the interest of creating new OGF research group.

Main goals of the project:
To establish research group devoted to integration of remote instrumentation with e-Infrastructure


Main scientific target:
- To integrate  approaches in defining remote access interfaces to
sophisticated laboratory equipment in e-Infrastructure environment.
- To work out a framework able to make deployment of various scientific disciplines.

In addition 4 projects organized a joint stand at the exhibition area (#2), with topics
correlated with the BOF and future research group: GRIDCC, g-Eclipse, int.eu.grid, RINGRID.


Presentations at the BOF:
1. Instrumentation requirements for advanced e-Infrastructures (Norbert Meyer)

Dr. Norbert Meyer (PSNC) presented the scientific background of the remote instrumentation as well as the projects which addressed
different aspects of this . He mentioned pointed out the functional requirements collected in RINGRID project,
moved the functional requirements into IT requirements for different levels:  networking, computational, visualization,
storage, grid middleware upto application level.
He pointed out the functionality which is still missing but expected by the end user to empower the daily work
of scientific communities, and integration with e-Infrastructure, including Grids, i.e.
interactivity, visualisation, collaborative environments, workflows and missing frameworks for future
deployment.


2. Collaborative environment and workflow decomposition for remote instrumentation (Roberto Pugliese)

Dr. Roberto Pugliese (ELETTRA) described the GRIDCC project,  introducing the pilot applications and then focusing on the developed technologies and in particular the  Instrument Element, the Virtual Control Room and the Workflow Management System.
The Instrument Element is virtualising access to real Instruments and Sensors as the Computing Element is virtualising access to computational  resources. The Instrument Element  supports  a wide variety of instruments from high end to embedded devices.
The Virtual Control Room is a groupware tool that support distributed and heterogeneous teams of people in the collaborative access to the extended eInfrastructure. The Complex workflows integrating instruments, computational and storage resources can be executed by the Workflow Management System.
Dr. Roberto Pugliese then pointed out the need of sustainability of  all these development efforts, the need to move from prototypal installations to production  environments through standardization and also the need to support new user communities.


3. Interactive controlling and monitoring of applications in grid environment (int.eu.grid) (Jesus Marco)

Dr. Jesus Marco (CSIC) described the challenges posed by the use of an e-Infrastructure for the execution of interactive applications, and some of the solutions developed in the Interactive European Grid project.
The goal is that the researcher using a virtual desktop, as user-friendly as a workstation, can benefit from the computing power of distributed clusters integrated using the Grid technology.
A key component is the parallelization of the applications, supported through OpenMPI. The project has developed a layer, mpi_start, and now provides an adequate support for execution of MPI jobs in the Grid.
A second key component is the Interactive Broker, that through a glide-in mechanism allows to prioritize interactive parallel jobs, even using resources from several sites. Finally, the Migrating Desktop integrates the visualization, remotely assembled using the power of the grid, and streamed as video, as well as the steering.
All these technical challenging issues solved, the real challenge now is to support adequately the research communities, and also to address the integration of instrumentation, closing the loop of the simulation with a powerful scientific workstation.


4. Interactive grid framework standardization in Eclipse environment (Harald Kornmayer)

Dr. Harald Kornmayer (FZK) presented the opportunities for remote
instrumentation offered by the emerging g-Eclipse framework. Based
on Eclipse the project will offer a new Grid workbench for Grid users,
operators and developers. By demonstrating the first implementations
the frameworks follows a fat-client approach which enable the usage of
many different protocols needed for remote instrumentation.


5. Visualization in grid environment (Dieter Kranzlmueller)

Prof. Dieter Kranzlmueller (GUP) pointed out the importance of remote scientific visualisation on the Grid in context of accessing and interacting with remote instruments. Visualisation plays important role as it is needed for understanding the data, it connects to simulation and remote instruments and it provides interactive steering of visualisation output and instruments. Some use cases has been mentioned (like Biomed Investigation).  Prof. Kranzlmueller presented solution of  video streaming in the Grid with usage of GVid.


The aim of the presentations was to present the requirements of users and the background and the current state
in the mentioned above projects, but did not present the current state, what will be a subject of further work.

After the presentations, session leader gave a summary,
and defined main objectives for new the new proposed research group.
These objectives have been discussed in the team of several people from the audience.

Approximately 10 participants volunteered to join the initiative and start a work on white paper what
would be one of the initial steps of the research group. This group will also prepare a charter and plan of
work on creation of the group and participation in the research and preparation of documents from this domain.

It was pointed out the necessity to include the entire spectrum of work done in other projects, not only
in Europe.  The decision is to invite other projects worldwide which are  related with remote instrumentation.
Additional communities which might be interested to join the group: astronomy (we will contact the head of
the Astronomy Workshop, which was held in parallel to our BOF), environmental science grid, LHC, projects
dealing with sensor networks.


It was recommended to have 2-3 chairs from different countries and continents to have a well scientific representation.

That first chair of the preliminary group Marcin Plociennik (PSNC, Poland), who will make further steps in terms
of inviting other groups, define the roadmap and start the work of the charter.


It was also decided to create website and mailing list for this
new proposed research group.

First preliminary future plans (to be discussed within the community):

- invite other projects worldwide which are  related with remote instrumentation

- prepare a list of final objectives (not to touch all objectives of the mentioned projects but a focus line)
- prepare a charter and plan of work on creation of the group and participation in the research

- present  best practices
   - what can be taken from existing projects and other research and working groups
   - establish the priorities of objectives
- Work out white papers of the current state
- Work on specific objectives - prepare roadmap for each objective


